Once around dark flow.
So dark flow is another name that goes
along with the two names that we
probably all have heard associated with
other dark stuff. Dark matter, the extra
unseen mass whose gravity causes
galaxies to spin faster than we expect
based on all of the material that we can
see and detect. with all of our
different telescopes at different
wavelengths. Everything from gamma
radiation through visible light down to
radio waves. We can add it all up and
there's just not enough of it to explain
how a galaxy can h hold together when
rotating as fast as it does or indeed
hold groups of galaxies together in
large galaxy clusters like the coma
cluster shown at the bottom there where
Fritz Vicki first came up with the uh
problem that there seemed to be 450
times too much mass to explain how the
cluster held itself together under
gravity. And then we have dark energy,
the
name given to the effect whereby it
appears that the universe is
accelerating in its expansion rather
than slowing down and gravity should be
gradually slowing it down, causing the
initial expansion rate to get lower and
lower, perhaps never actually reversing
it. But the observations made in the
late 1990s and the theories that were
associated with dark energy seem to
suggest some sort of mystery negative
pressure pushing faster and faster from
empty space itself generating this so
that the more space there is the more
pressure there is the faster everything
flies apart. Now, that's been called
into question recently and is the
subject of another talk of mine. In
fact, so is dark matter. And we're
[snorts] not here to talk really about
either of those.
What we are looking at is the fact that
whole clusters of galaxies are moving
independently of the expansion rate of
the universe. They all do that. They all
have their peculiar motion as it's
known, their individual motion relative
to the wider large scale average. But in
one particular corner of the visible
universe, a whole group of galaxies in
clusters, in fact, several clusters
making superclusters are all moving
towards one region of the sky. And this
is rather difficult to explain.
When we look way back in time to the
period just 380,000 years after the Big
Bang, we see the afterglow, the cosmic
microwave background radiation, the
CMBB, as an almost uniform temperature
across the sky. 2.7° above absolute zero
is the measurement we get for it at the
moment. Plus or minus about one part in
100,000. And those tiny fluctuations are
what's shown in the false color map of
the sky at the top there with red being
intense uh slight increases and blue
being the cold spots that are just
100,000th of a degree too cold compared
to the average. So very tiny. But this
radiation is the leftover heat that was
able to finally flow through the
universe as radiation unimpeded once the
overall temperature of the gas in the
universe dropped to the point where full
atoms could form and they became
transparent around about 4,000 degrees
Kelvin. Now, expansion of the universe
has stretched that radiation from 4,000
Kelvin to 2.7 Kelvin by a factor of well
over a thousand now. And that has made
the wavelengths longer, moving the light
from a sort of orange
glow in the visible part of the
spectrum, the color of the surface of an
orange small star perhaps down to this
long wavelength in the microwave region
and is detectable only with our radio
telescopes.
One of which was the W map satellite.
And in 2008, there was an analysis of
the data from three years of W map
surveying of the temperature of the
microwave background across the sky. And
the observations were looking out to
around 1 billion light years away from
the solar system, away from the Milky
Way. And there was a hint that there was
a movement shown in that purple region
there that's been superimposed on the
image to show this region of the sky
that seemed to be where material was
moving away from us faster than typical
perhaps a Doppler shift as the uh
temperature of the radiation was altered
by the apparent movement away from us
giving it extra red shift. And the
cluster of galaxies in that region is
shown in the inset there. So that was
2008. Well, it was followed up in 2010
by Kashinski in the Godart Space Flight
Center.
Now looking at a thousand galaxy
clusters, a much larger sample, and
going over double the distance to 2.5
billion light years. And you can see
that the mapping has changed depending
on where you look. So we have the
furthest away galaxies with the deepest
red color uh then orange, yellow, green,
and blue moving from at most 2.5 billion
light years away to the much closer
region around 1 billion lighty years
away. And you can see that the center or
point of that zone has shifted as you go
further further back in time. Now the
way that this analysis has been done
uses an effect which I want to explain
to you and it's the SZ effect. The sonif
zelvich effect. Uh this is not widely
talked about but it's an effect whereby
the cosmic microwave background
radiation and it the spectrum of it is
altered as the radiation passes through
material on its way to us and into our
radio telescopes. And the picture at the
bottom there is the big Amy experiment,
the Royal Array here in Cambridge uh at
the Mard Radio Astronomy Observatory
just southwest of the city there. Um and
I've visited there a number of times
going back again in June actually taking
a a party of interested people on a
tour.
And the big Amy is one of the
experiments that is still running and
it's in conjunction with little Amy uh
which the two together are able to look
at this SZ effect in two different ways
and the data combined from the two
experiments is really what we're talking
about here.
The first is to look at the thermal
SZ effect, which is where the overall
temperature of the
cosmic microwave background is altered
by the fact that the photons get a kick
from thermal electrons in clouds of
ionized material. As the photons go
through, they get clouted by electrons
and they pick up a little bit of an
extra kick, little bit of extra energy
and so that can be determined. And then
we have the kinematic as said effect
which is where the material is moving
and essentially you get a Doppler shift
effect of the movement of the electrons
relative to the uh cosmic microwave
background photons giving a a different
imprint on the spectrum. And it's by
combining the two experiments that we're
able to measure this uh effect and
determine that there are regions of
ionized material
clouds of protons and electrons from
ionized hydrogen associated with these
galaxy clusters that are moving away
from us because of the Doppler shift.
Now, the Plank satellite got in on the
act with a much higher resolution
version of the map of the cosmic
microwave background radiation back in
2013. it seems like just yesterday and
seemed to show no evidence of this
effect at all in the initial analysis.
But two years later, 2015,
um scientists were able to see that
there is some evidence for this peculiar
motion going on out there in the very
distant parts of the universe. Uh, but I
wouldn't say this is settled yet. But
what I want to talk to you about is the
idea that it might be something that's a
real detection. But as with all of these
things, we're pushing the boundary of
what is known.
So what did we think we have found?
Well, somewhere in this region marked in
the huge red ellipse there spanning the
constellations of Centurus in the
middle, Hydra at the top and Norma at
the bottom. There is this area which
seems to be suffering this peculiar
motion away from us in this very very
distant region 2.5 billion light years
away across the the universe. Now this
turns out to be the direction of
something called the greater tractor.
And I've done a video about the greater
tractor which you might want to go and
search for. And this is in fact in the
constellation of Norma
probably a huge cluster of galaxies, the
Norma cluster.
And it seems to be the source of immense
gravity pulling on ourselves, the Virgo
cluster that we're part of and a lot of
other material all moving in that
direction in a in a region that we
pretty much understand. We understand
how fast we're moving towards it and can
estimate the mass. And there's no
particular problem with this except for
the fact that 250 million years is
relatively nearby. Sorry, 250 million
light years is relatively nearby.
Not the 2.5 billion that we're talking
about. That must be 10 times further
away in this general direction. So,
we're not actually looking at the
greater attractor being part of this
pull. In fact, it would be pulling the
material back towards it in the other
direction. So, it's not the great
attractor. This is something much more
distant, possibly even so far away that
we can't see it. And I don't mean that
we haven't seen it, but that I mean that
it might be beyond our cosmic horizon.
some sort of huge accumulation of matter
whose gravity is affecting the very
distant universe pulling it towards
something that we cannot see because the
light from that
large mass whatever it is has not yet
had time to reach us yet.
So this points towards the idea of our
cosmic horizon.
We can only see as far as the light
travel time since the big bang. The
further we look, the further back in
time we are looking all the way back to
those early times with the cosmic
microwave background actually being the
limit as far as visible light is
concerned. Um, and that's very very
close indeed all the way back to the Big
Bang. It's just 380,000
years after the beginning. Um, which is
some 13.7
billion years ago.
So,
we can't see any further than that. Of
course, as the universe gets older, we
would expect that we would be able to
see light that has traveled further. And
so that cosmic horizon you might expect
to increase in size. Uh the problem is
that as space is expanding
if you look far enough away there is a
point where expansion is carrying
material away from us faster than the
speed of light. It's not moving through
space. It's the space growing faster
than the speed of light. Meaning that
the light will never get here. So one
way or another there is a cosmic horizon
and that cosmic horizon is personal to
all of us. I have a diagram here showing
the idea with the earth in the middle.
Um there is no middle but we might as
well put ourselves somewhere and showing
that
either side of us we have objects A and
B which are right on the limit of the
light travel time. So that we have just
received the first photons that set off
from A and from B in opposite directions
and we can just detect their presence
right at the limit of our cosmic
horizon.
Likewise, photons from Earth will just
be arriving at A and they'll be just
arriving at B having traveled for 13.78
billion years. Now the problem is that
whilst we can see both A and B and they
can each see us, they can't see each
other because light from A has only
reached halfway to B under this model.
And so each of them sees a sphere around
them which is their cosmic light
horizon. And uh we all have different
ones. Yours is different to mine. mine
is different to people who are on the uh
Andromeda galaxy and so forth. And so
maybe there is some large mass creating
this dark flow as we call it pulling
perhaps object A towards something that
exists within A's cosmic light horizon
but does not yet exist within ours. And
as I said because of the expansion of
the universe carrying very distant
things away from us that might never
become true. It might get carried away
faster than the light is able to cross
the space and so the photons might never
arrive at earth. Um and the these are
two different horizons in fact.
But another explanation is that maybe
this is outside influence.
The theory of inflation that describes
the very very earliest instance of time
between the big bang and the tiniest
millionth of a second afterwards talks
about
a universe of cosmic foam expanding
exponentially way faster than the speed
of light. blowing it up to a huge size
and explaining why the uh cosmic
microwave background is so uniform
because it used to all be in a tiny
space and all in causal contact before
inflation ripped it apart into a truly
vast size.
And it talks to the fact that these
cosmic bubbles could exist where
different periods of inflation may have
kicked off in different regions of an
overall enormous inflationary universe.
And that perhaps our big bang is just
one of many.
and that maybe that the dark flow is in
fact the influence of something that is
outside of our inflated bubble and
wasn't ever part of our big bang at all.
And so studying this and understanding
if this is a real effect, if there are
other cases of it elsewhere, pointing in
different directions, mapping the cosmos
to see if we can see these objects that
are giving us hints of what lies beyond
our reach could be a whole new branch of
astronomy.
So, thanks very much for listening to
that little chat about the ideas of dark
flow and what lies beyond the edge of
the universe.